Enhancement for User Space Pod Interface and API Library (#454)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/network/user-space-pod-iface-and-api-library.md

---
title: User Space Pod Interface and API Library
authors:
  - "@bmcfall"
reviewers:
  - "@dcbw"
  - "@zshi"
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2020-08-20
last-updated: 2020-08-20
status: implementable
---

# User Space Pod Interface and API Library

> Add OCP support for user space applications (i.e. - DPDK based applications)

Author: Added two introduction paragraphs to the `Summary` section to address.

running in pods.

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> A typical pod has one and only one kernel interface (one side of a veth-pair).

Author: Done

Interface attributes such as IP address and MAC address are applied to the

> interface through the kernel. More advance use-cases involve injecting more than

Author: Done

one interface into the pod using meta-CNI plugins such as Multus. In this case,
there are several scenarios that require additional information passed to the
pod:

> - Multiple interfaces:

Author: Done

  - With multiple interfaces now in the pod, the pod needs context on which
  interface is intended for what purpose.
  - Needed in most multi-interface scenarios, but specifically OCP related,

>   when multiple SR-IOV VFs are injected into a pod.

Author: Removed. Didn't add much value.

- Kernel interface is used by user space application in the pod:
  - When the container workload performs packet processing in user space,
  for example a DPDK application, the interface is no longer managed by the

>   kernel in the pod, and data like IP address and MAC address can not use the

Author: @zshi-redhat Thought I added a comment but missed this one. "we don't have a way to allocate" - What is different on the host/CNI side with regards to allocating an IP when the container is running DPDK?

>   kernel in the pod, and data like IP address and MAC address can not use the

Reviewer: @Billy99  When using sriov-cni for sriov dpdk interface, it only configures the VF attributes such as vlan/qos, but doesn't call IPAM plugin to allocate any IP address. If we want to allocate an IP address for dpdk interface, I think we need the IPAM plugin to support allocating an un-used IP address but not assign it to interface.

>   kernel in the pod, and data like IP address and MAC address can not use the

Author: @zshi-redhat Correct, implementation detail, IPAM is not called. But it could be. Not a technical reason. Currently, network-status has the IPs, but doesn't include the CIDR. I think if we were to push the applying of the IP to the container, we need the CIDR.

>   kernel to pass this information.

Author: Rewrote and added more detail.

  - In addition to data typically passed via the kernel interface, user space
  applications require additional information to function properly. Examples
  of some of the data include:
    - CPUs allocated to the pod
    - Number of hugepages dedicated to the pod

>     - Number of queues used by the interface

Author: Yes, the number of driver queues. Don't know how it is configured and passed to interface? I'll remove it from the document but I think it is something we will need in the future.

>     - Number of queues used by the interface

Reviewer: ack

  - Needed in most user space application scenarios, but specifically OCP

>   related, when user space applications use SR-IOV VFs in a pod.

Author: Rewrote and added more detail.

- User space interface is injected into the pod:

>   - A user space interface, like a pure user space interface such as

Author: Rewrote.

  vhost-user (not supported by OCP) or a VDPA interface, which uses the
  virtio protocol for data plane negotiation (support expect in future OCP
  release, around 4.8 or 4.9 time frame), requires additional information like
  Unix socket file and virtio mode.
  - Not needed by OCP immediately, but must be considered during the overall

>   design.

Author: Cleaned up and added some footnotes.

This enhancement has two components:
- How the data should be passed to the pod?
- How to ease the consumption of the data in the pod?

## Motivation

Various system resources are allocated to run high performance network
applications inside a container such as CPU cores, dedicated memory (hugepages),
network devices, etc. However, these resources are presented differently inside
the container and some of them are not visible to applications without
explicitly injecting to the container.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 2: I guess the template doesn't say this, but this section is usually done as fairly precise bullet points. eg

- Define how data is passed from Kubernetes to user space networking applications
- Provide a library to be used for developers to blah blah blah
- Ensure customers using SR-IOV can something something something
- etc

Author: Done

user space interfaces for applications (mainly DPDK) in containers, with the
initial primary purpose of supporting SR-IOV interfaces.

### Non-Goals

The following items are out of scope for this proposal:
- This could, secondarily, also be used to support user space data plane
technologies like ovs-dpdk, but its not the same, and its not our primary goal.
- Non-SR-IOV devices (vDPA and vhost-user interfaces) require additional
information. However, these devices are not required for this enhancement.
That being said, some of the upstream work this enhancement is pulling from does
include those interfaces. So the API Library may include some of the additional
work for these interfaces.

## Proposal

As described above, there are two parts to this enhancement. Work is need to
pass additional data to the pod to enable user space applications to run
properly. Work is also needed in the pod to ease the consumption of the data.
Each item will be described below.

### Passing Data to the Pod

Currently, data is passed to the pod in several forms:
- **PCI Addresses**: SR-IOV Device Plugin passes the list of PCI Addresses in

> the an environmental variable to the pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an environment variable to the pod.
```

Author: Done.

- **Interface Data**: Multus populates the pod annotation with a
'*k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks-status*' field. This annotation contains the list
of interfaces, and for each interface, the MAC address, list of IP addresses

> (not CIDR), interface (net1, net2, etc), name, etc. If the Kubernetes Downward
> API is enabled, this information is available to the pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(not CIDR), interface (net1, net2, etc), name, etc. The pod can use the
Kubernetes Downward API to retrieve this information.
```

(The API is always "enabled", it's just a question of whether the Pod makes use of it or not)

Author: Done.

- **CPU List**: The dedicated CPU list can be retrieved by reading the

> '*cpuset*' from the cGroup in the pod.

Reviewer 2: That's like a filesystem thing? Maybe specify that as a path then?

Author: Done.

For user space applications running in pod, the following information is still
needed:
- **Hugepage Information**: The type and number of hugepages allocated to the
pod.

> - **Additional Interface Data**: The '*k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks-status*'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Additional Interface Data**: The '*k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/network-status*'
```

(likewise elsewhere)

Reviewer: looking at the code, it actually uses `networks-status`.

Reviewer 2: The spec says `network-status`.

Ah... it looks like `networks-status` was a mistake, and Multus currently sets both `network-status` and `networks-status`, but will eventually stop setting `networks-status`. (https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/network-attachment-definition-client/issues/17#issuecomment-576539258).

Author: Yes, forgot about that. I just grabbed the string from the appNetUtil code (which hasn't been updated in a while). I'll update the doc.

Author: Done.

contains a '*name*', which is the network in the CRD, but doesn't have enough

> information to determine which PCI Adress is associated with which interface.
> So addition information is needed o make that association within the pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
information to determine which PCI Address is associated with which interface.
So additional information is needed to make that association within the pod.
```

Also, not clear what the reference to `name` in the `network-status` is about; that's the purely-kubernetes-internal name of the network attachment. Did you mean `interface`?

Author: Added a footnote.

#### Hugepage Information

There was an upstream Kubernetes PR,
[86102](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/86102),
to enhance the Kubernetes Downward API to add hugepage information to the set
of supported fields. This PR was closed due to inactivity. The plan is to
resubmit the PR and try to push the functionality into Kubernetes. It doesn't
appear that there were any major objections to the PR, just lack of activity.

If this feature can make it into upstream Kubernetes, then the pod will have
hugepage information needed by user space applications.

#### Additional Interface Data

Work is being done in the Network Plumbing Working Group (NPWG) to standardize
how data for secondary interfaces is passed to a pod. NPWG is where the standard
is defined that Multus is implemented too. See:

> [Kubernetes Network Custom Resource Definition De-facto Standard](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ny03h6IDVy_e_vmElOqR7UdTPAG_RNydhVE1Kx54kFQ/edit?usp=sharing).

Reviewer 2: should probably reference something in https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multi-net-spec now?

Author: Better. Done.

Proposal:

[NPWG - Device Information](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rBm-L1ymXIjoKNA6w2lixwBAjt9-tnbs-ee7AcLRbVE/edit?usp=sharing)

The proposal has been discussed in the NPWG for several months and there is
general agreement on the feature and now work is being done on finalizing the
smaller details, The remaining work includes:
- Updating the specification, defining the new fields in
'*k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks-status*'
- Completing a best practices document which describes how the data is passed
between a Device Plugin or Admission Controller to a CNI, and what Multus needs
to do with the collected data.

Once that is completed, the following projects will need to be updated to add
support (proof of concept already exists for most of these):
- SR-IOV Device Plugin
- SR-IOV CNI
- SR-IOV Network-Resource Injector
- Multus
- app-netutil

#### Consumption of Data in the Pod

Data passed into a pod can come from several places. Below are some examples:
- For kernel interfaces, data can be applied to the interface via the kernel
itself.
- For SR-IOV VFs, the PCI Address list is passed into the pod via an

> environmental variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
environment variable.
```

Author: Fixed globally.

- Using Kubernetes Downward API, pod annotation data is exposed within the pod.
Data is written to the pod annotation and consumed by the pod.

To ease the burden of the CNF developer, an API library is being developed that
collects data from all the different sources and exposes the data through a set
of APIs. The API is written in Golang and can be imported into other Golang
programs. Since DPDK is the primary user space application being targeted, and
DPDK is written in C, there is also a C API binding for the Golang library.

The library is located in github at the following URL:
- https://github.com/openshift/app-netutil/

The library will not be released in OCP, but will be available for CNF
developers to include in their projects. If the CNF developers choose not to
include the library, the library will still serve as an example of where to pull
the data from and how to consume the data.

The following APIs will be exposed:

> - GetCPUInfo()

Reviewer 2: general style note: use backticks around things that are "code-like" (eg, function names here, references to API fields, annotation names, etc) a lot of the places where you're currently doing `"*foo*"` would be better as `` `foo` ``

Author: Done

> - GetCPUInfo()

Author: Added a note to the enhancement doc. It will need to be added to the customer documentation as well.

> - GetCPUInfo()

Reviewer: ack

  - Returns the set of CPUs assigned to the pod.
- GetInterfaces()
  - Returns the set of interfaces associated with the pod and a structure for
  each interface containing the type of interface and the data specific to that
  interface type.
- GetHugepageInfo()
  - Returns the amount of hugepage memory reserved for the pod and page size.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

### Risks and Mitigations

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer 3: Is there any test plan?

Author: Not yet. Need something.

### Graduation Criteria

The '*appNetUtil*' library was introduced as Tech Preview in OCP 4.5. The plan
is to make the library GA in OCP 4.7. To our knowledge, the '*appNetUtil*'
library is not currently being used. With the additions described in this
enhancement, the library should be more useful to CNF developers. Also by moving
to GA, the library attract more users and provide feedback on ways to improve
the usefulness  of the library.

##### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

In Tech Preview, the following APIs are defined in
"*github.com/openshift/app-netutil/lib/v1alpha*":
- GetCPUInfo()
  - Returns the set of CPUs assigned to the pod.
- GetInterfaces()
  - Returns the set of interfaces associated with the pod and a structure for
  each interface containing the type of interface and the data specific to that
  interface type.

##### Tech Preview -> GA 

> In GA, the following APIs are defined in

Author: Good question. I can do either. I could keep around for one release even though I am not sure if it is being used.

> "*github.com/openshift/app-netutil/lib/v1*":

Reviewer: so the API version will be graduated from v1alpha to v1, no beta?

Author: Do you have a beta API with a GA product? I only moved it because of the request to go to GA.

Reviewer: ack, I think beta is not must-to-have.

- GetCPUInfo()
  - Returns the set of CPUs assigned to the pod.
  - Same as Tech Preview.

> - GetInterfaces()

Reviewer: Do we need to complete the additional device information proposal in 4.7 or it can come later?

Author: We don't need all the data, but the proposal in the NPWG adds the DeviceId to the network-status annotaion, which is the key to tie a given PCI Address (interface) with the network (how the interface should be used).

Reviewer: ack, so we will need the proposal be implemented to get the pci-network mapping.

  - Returns the set of interfaces associated with the pod and a structure for
  each interface containing the type of interface and the data specific to that
  interface type.
  - The returned structure will be expanded to include additional data.
- GetHugepageInfo()
  - Returns the amount of hugepage memory reserved for the pod and page size.
  - New API.

##### Removing a deprecated feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

appNetUtil Library:
- Tech Preview: OCP 4.5 - June, 2020
- GA: OCP 4.7 - February, 2021

## Drawbacks

## Alternatives

> ## Infrastructure Needed [optional]

Reviewer: Integrate the app-netutil project with CI ?

Author: Are you asking about CI within the https://github.com/openshift/app-netutil/ (which I think we need to add) or integrated into the OCP CI?

Reviewer: CI in app-netutil repo.

Reviewer: CI in app-netutil repo.

Author: Added a CI note to the Test Plan section.

  interfaces is not needed by OCP immediately, but must be considered during the
  overall design.

This enhancement has two components:

- How the data should be passed to the pod?
- How to ease the consumption of the data in the pod?

## Motivation

Various system resources are allocated to run high performance network
applications inside a container such as CPU cores, dedicated memory (hugepages),
network devices, etc. However, these resources are presented differently inside
the container and some of them are not visible to applications without
explicitly injecting to the container.

### Goals

- Define what data needs to be passed from Kubernetes to a user space
networking application to enable the application to run properly.

- Define how this data is passed from Kubernetes to a user space networking
application.

- Ease the consumption of the data that was passed into a user space networking
application by providing a library that both provides an example of how the
data can be collected and if desired, integrated directly into the application. 

- Ensure customers using SR-IOV can run user space networking applications in

> their deployment.

Reviewer 2: (I was just using "ensure customers using SR-IOV..." as an example of "sometimes the bullet points are more focused on the customer goal than on the development details". I wasn't necessarily suggesting we actually _need_ to have a bullet point about customers using SR-IOV. Feel free to remove this if you don't think it adds any important perspective to the doc.)

Author: Yes, I realized that you were just giving an example of possible items in bullet form. But I think it added value. It was the catch all, to make sure DPDK applications can be run and to add any additional fields that I missed in the design. I could do all this work I mention and it still doesn't work (I think I most covered though). I'll remove if you don't like though.

### Non-Goals

The following items are out of scope for this proposal:

- This could, secondarily, also be used to support user space data plane
technologies like ovs-dpdk, but its not the same, and its not our primary goal.

- Non-SR-IOV devices (vDPA and vhost-user interfaces) require additional
information. However, these devices are not required for this enhancement.
That being said, some of the upstream work this enhancement is pulling from
does include those interfaces. So the API Library may include some of the
additional work for these interfaces.

## Proposal

> As described above, there are two parts to this enhancement. Work is need to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described above, there are two parts to this enhancement. Work is needed to
```

Author: Done. Will be fixed in the next commit.

an environment variable to the pod.

- **Interface Data**: Multus populates the pod annotation with a
`k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/network-status` field. This annotation contains the list
of interfaces, and for each interface, the MAC address, list of IP addresses
(not CIDR), interface (net1, net2, etc), name, etc. The pod can use the
Kubernetes Downward API to retrieve this information.

- **CPU List**: The dedicated CPU list can be retrieved by reading
`/sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/cpuset.cpus` in the pod.

For user space networking applications running in a pod, the following
information is still needed:

- **Hugepage Information**: The type and number of hugepages allocated to the
pod.

- **Additional Interface Data**: The `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/network-status`
contains a `name` field, which is the network in the
[Network-Attachment-Definition](#networkattachmentdefinition). The `name`
does indicate how the interface is intended to be used, however, the pod doesn't
have enough information to determine which PCI Address is associated with which
interface. So additional information is needed to make that association within

> the pod.

Reviewer 2: I still don't understand why you're talking about `name` here... `name` is a freeform string. While it may "indicate how the interface is intended to be used" to a user, it's certainly not expected to do so in any machine-parsable way, so it seems completely irrelevant to mention it here.

Also, how do the PCI Addresses discussed here relate to the environment variables passed from the SR-IOV plugin mentioned earlier? Actually... why is the SR-IOV plugin passing information about PCI Addresses, but _not_ passing enough information to match them to interfaces? Or are we only talking about PCI Addresses in non-SR-IOV use cases here?

Author: So last set of questions first:
- "why is the SR-IOV plugin passing information about PCI Addresses, but not passing enough information to match them to interfaces?" Just an oversight. But there have been multiple complaints that in the container there is just a list of PCI Addresses with no additional data. Right now, if it is used at all, they are just going by the order they are in the list of PCI Addresses.
- "Or are we only talking about PCI Addresses in non-SR-IOV use cases here?" So for OCP 4.7, we are just talking SR-IOV. There is broader design to make other types of interfaces work, but OCP 4.7 is only concerned with SR-IOV.

As far as `name` just being a free-form string, "not expected to do so in any machine-parsable way" - Then that is a design flaw on my side and something else needs to be added. Currently, there is no other existing fields that I know of to convey how the interface should be used. I'll look into this more.

Author: Also, wrt my first bullet, SR-IOV Device Plugin does not have all the information. SR-IOV Device Plugin does not have all the config data that is in the network-attachment-definition. SR-IOV CNI has it. That is part of the NPWG new "best practices" doc. How to pass data between Plugin / CNI / Meta CNI Plugin / Container.

Reviewer 2: So I feel like something still needs to be updated here; if the system depends on people naming their NetworkAttachmentDefinitions in a particular way, then that needs to be either fixed or explicitly documented (and then fixed later on, because, ew).

Author: I added a sub-bullet indicating that the "intended use" would need to be encoded in the `name` field. I will continue to work wit the upstream communities to find an alternative solution.

#### Hugepage Information

There was an upstream Kubernetes PR,
[86102](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/86102),
to enhance the Kubernetes Downward API to add hugepage information to the set
of supported fields. This PR was closed due to inactivity. The plan is to
resubmit the PR and try to push the functionality into Kubernetes. It doesn't

> appear that there were any major objections to the PR, just lack of activity.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is already out of date, as it looks like @derekwaynecarr reopened the PR last week

Author: @danwinship Thanks for looking again. I'll address your comments shortly.

I have been attending sig-node meetings to determine how to address the hugepage issue which prompt Derek reopen. I'll cleanup and make the text more generic.

With regards to your other comment about using the name to determine how an interface is used, I agree it is not great and this is the only reason I have not pushed to get the document merged. I talked with Zenghui some on this and we haven't come up with a better solution. If you have any recommendations let us know.

developers to include in their projects. If the CNF developers choose not to
include the library, the library will still serve as an example of where to pull
the data from and how to consume the data.

The following APIs will be exposed:

- `GetCPUInfo()`
  - Returns the set of CPUs assigned to the pod.
  - **Note:** When pod is created with non-guaranteed QoS, this API returns all
  available cpus on the node, not just those dedicated to a pod. 

- `GetInterfaces()`
  - Returns the set of interfaces associated with the pod and a structure for
  each interface containing the type of interface and the data specific to that
  interface type.

- `GetHugepageInfo()`
  - Returns the amount of hugepage memory reserved for the pod and page size.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

### Risks and Mitigations

- **Risk**: One risk with moving this to GA is that there has been no customer
feedback on the `appNetUtil` library.
  - **Mitigation**: Because the `appNetUtil` library is not built into OCP,
  changes could be made to how the library presents the data to the caller post
  OCP 4.7, provided that the data feed into the container is correct.

> - **Risk**: On of the items identified is to update Kubernetes to add hugepage

Reviewer 2: typo "One of"

Author: Fixed in next commit.
